So welcome to
ApplyForceAtLocation() in Action! What we're going to do in this video is
actually start applying some forces to the tank, and what will happen
is, if we were to turn off gravity on the tanks, at least, then you would
see that once we've finished our floating tank, when we accelerate,
does actually start to move. The reason we're not going to get it moving on the ground
is because in the next lecture after this one, we'll be dealing with friction and overcoming friction. So I'll see you in there!
I can feel the anticipation building for this lecture, because the tank is going to move
in this lecture, [Laughs] one way or another, under our control. So firstly,
so that I don't have to connect my gamepad every time, I'm just going to go to the Project
Settings, Input, and then, under these axis bindings for the gamepad
Left Trigger Axis, I'm going to add an alternative input which is just going
to be the Left arrow. So not the gamepad but the Left keyboard Arrow,
and I'll do the same on the Right Track. Just search for "right",
collapse Gamepad, Right, perfect! And these things,
of course, will send just a value of 1 or 0. You won't be able to go backwards on the track
and you won't be able to control it in an analog way, but it'll allow me to just use the cursor keys
if I want to. Fantastic! So let's go in and just check that those reports
work. Yep, looking in the console that's all fine! Great!
So it's time to start thinking about actually applying a force to this tank!
So one of the first things we're going to want, over in our code, is the notion of
a max force variable, something like a track
max driving force. So that would be a float, because a float is big enough
to store pretty large numbers, billiions, and
we don't want to constrain ourselves to integers. So float,
I don't know, TrackMaxDriving
Force =... Hmm, now we need some sensible
default value, and we're also going to make it a UPROPERTY. Let me do the UPROPERTY thing
now. So it's going to be a UPROPERTY() so the designer can
tweak this in the Inspector, but we still need a sensible default value.
So it's going to be a UPROPERTY, now what is it's class
of UPROPERTY going to be? It's going to be (EditDefault
Only) because we don't want to be able to change this
on individual instances, we want all the tanks to be the same
right, we want it to be fair. So we have an (EditDefaultsOnly) UPROPERTY,
the question is, what is a sensible starting MaxDrivingForce
for the tank? Bearing in my, by the way, that we're actually going to have two driving
centers, what we're going to do, if we look at the tank blueprint in the Viewport,
is we're going to realize that these two tracks have their pivot points
down here at the bottom in the middle of them, this one and this one. And what we're going to do is, we're going to apply
a forward force to the tank body, this element here,
but we're going to apply that force at the position of the track's origins,
which is just about right because that is in the middle of the tracks.
So that'll work pretty well! Alright, so we're going to have two separate tracks but let's not
worry about a pair of two, at the moment, i.e. whether we're going to have, you know,
however many Newtons of force or twice that many or half that many; I'm not worried about that,
I'm worried about the order of magnitude, at the moment, their like a factor of 10,
the amount of force we're going to need to accelerate a tank, at a reasonable
pace. And that's what we're going to put in here, in the TrackMaxDrivingForce
in Newtons! So let's put a comment on here. This
is "// Max force per track, in
Newtons". OK great! So what I want you to do is see
if you could work out what a sensible default would be for this.  Now, I'm going to give you a few hints.
Remember that Force = mass times acceleration, good old Newton! Be
clear on what units we're using here. So as a hint you need to use
SI units for everything, for this to work properly. So your force will be in Newtons, your mass
is in kilograms, your acceleration is in meters per second, per second
Guess an initial force, assuming there's no friction in the world. There actually is
some friction but let's assume there's none, for the moment. Don't be too alarmed if your
tank doesn't... Well we're not putting forces in, I just want you to get an initial value. So
assume there's no friction stopping the tank moving, imagine that it's frictionless, and
let's go and let's try and get within an factor of 10 of my guess.
So I want you to work out what the acceleration of the tank, a sensible acceleration of the tank would
be. So to help you with a sensible acceleration for a tank I've got
a link here in the lecture resources, which goes to Wolfram Alpha and says well,
what's 0 to 60 miles per hour in 10 seconds, which is roughly what a fast tank
might do it in. And it says it is in the appropriate units
2.7 meters per second, per second. Well you could call it 10 in
a game perhaps, because games. 10 things tend to happen faster in games.
So that's what I want you to do, I want you to have a go,
see if you can work out in Newtons what a sensible force would be. As I say, if you get
within a factor of 10 of my guess, that's cool with me!
OK welcome back! So my solution goes something like this! The tank
weighs about 40,000 kilos. Let's just go and see where you find that
information. You look on the Tank here, it's the only part of the Tank that's got physics
enabled on it, and it's got a mass in kilos of 40,000. Fine!
So Force is mass times acceleration! Imagine 10 meters per second, per second,
1g of acceleration. OK that's a lot for a tank, but they're pretty fast,
and in a game, you gen, 10, ga, generally tend to expect
things to move a little bit faster than in real life or they just look too slow. So that gives you a force
of 400,000 Newtons. So let's go ahead
and try that as a default value 400000,
and then I'm going to put a comment in as to why
we're going to "// Assume tank" or "40 ton
tank, and 1g acceleration".
If I can spell acceleration. I think I've got too
many c's or l's or something in there but that's fine. OK, so the tank
MaxDrivingForce is set there, so then we've got that available
over here to use, which is going to be really important. So how we actually going to
apply the appropriate force to this tank, and that's the next question. Well
let's start building it up! Let's use autos because I
like the flexibility and how little you have to worry about what the type is, and of course, you can still get the
type by hovering over the variable in question. So
we're going to have a ForceApplied and that's going to be a vector,
and if you think what the ForceApplied is, it's going to
be the Forward Vector, for a start. So if we just get the Forward Vector
of what, you might ask? Of the track right, so we look in
here, and you look at the track and it's ForwardVector is along the X, the same as the
tank. You multiply that ForwardVector by what? By the
Throttle. OK, well that's fine, but now we need to multiply it
by this Max, TankMaxDrivingForce or TrackMaxDrivingForce, whatever we
call it. Perfect! So now if the Throttle is 0, you get no force. If the
Throttle is 1, you get the MaxDrivingForce. If the Throttle is -1, you get backwards
force, so that sounds about right to me. So now we need to think about the location
we're going to apply the force. So auto ForceLocation
and it turns out you can just use GetComponent
Location(); Now what's that going to return? Well ooh,
if I can spell Force properly. I would hope it will return an fVector. What is
that fVector? It is going to be the location of the tracks. Now
my tank is upside down, for some slightly bizarre reason.
What's going on here?
OK just a few Undos! So what I was [Laughs] say is the track location
is there, that's what I was talking about. So that is the component
location of the track in question. Finally, what we've got
to be able to do is, add a force to something, and what we want to add a force to is this guy here. This
Tank root component is a Static Mesh. How do I know it's the root component?
Because if I try and replace it with something else, you can see drop here "Drop here to make Left Track the
new root." So the question is, how do I get root component? Well there are several
ways you could navigate to the root component, but let's think about it this
way. Let's start by saying, well let's use an auto so we know what we're getting back,
and let's call this thing TankRoot
OK, which is just this guy here. So let's try and find this TankRoot. Well let's
imagine firstly that we just GetOwner().
What do we have if we GetOwner()? What type do we get back? Do we get an Actor? It's this guy
up here, it is the Tank itself. OK, so that is the owner of the track,
but we need to go farther than getting the owner, we need to get the root's component
from the owner. So we go up to the owner then down to the root component, what do we have now?
USceneComponent pointer which is this Tank here. OK
remembering that a Static Mesh Component is also a USceneComponent, let's have a look at the class
hierarchy.
So back in here we see we have the StaticMeshComponent, which
is what, in the tank blueprint, we are showing the tank as. But a Static
MeshComponent, is a MeshComponent, is a PrimitiveComponent, is a SceneComponent.
So what does this PrimitiveComponent do? Well "PrimitiveComponents are SceneComponents that
contain or generate some sort of geometry", and will "be rendered or used as collision
data." So we want to use the simplest thing possible. It turns out that a
SceneComponent, this TankRoot, which is what we've got at the moment, does not
allow us to add any forces. How about if we cast that down to a PrimitiveComponent,
will that allow us to add forces? Well let's find out! We're going to do a Cast
to U
PrimitiveComponent
with some brackets, and then, now what we get out of
the TankRoot is a UPrimitiveComponent.
Now, when we interrogate that, we can AddForceAtLocation().
So that is the most basic type of object we can use, where we can Add
ForceAtLocation(). So let's recap what we've done, because a fair amount's gone on there. We've
gone up the class hierarchy to the Owner, down to the Root Component, and
then we've cast that from a Static Mesh to a Primitive
Component, the simplest thing we could go to. And that allows us to Add a
Force At a Location. Now what does that take? What inputs does that take? Well
luckily we've got them! So it takes a ForceApplied as a vector, and a
ForceLocation. And that's it for now,
they're all the parameters we need to provide it! Let's see if this works! Let's go
ahead and Compile up our code. I'll leave the code on the screen
while it compiles, hopefully this stuff makes sense to you. We still need to clamps,
so the TODO needs to stay here. We may as well keep logging the throttles, while we're debugging. I'm going to
turn my gamepad on, actually, and then, we will see if it moves.
Now I wouldn't hold your horses too much, because the chances are there's friction in the world that's going to stop this
moving, but let's just see how we get. I'm running both throttles flat out,
and unfortunately, it doesn't move. Now,
I wouldn't worry too much, there is a force on there. One way you can tell that,
is to take the player start point, for example,
lift it up. You could turn off gravity
on the Tank and Compile it.
Then, if we play the game with it up in the air and put full throttle on, you can see it is actually
accelerating, and it's rolling back as well, because the force is off center compared
to the center of mass but it was accelerating. So the issues that are
causing it to not accelerate quite how we want it, are due to the
fact there's friction in the world. So just before we leave this lecture, I'll show you that problem, and then we'll solve
it in the next lecture. If I was to take an AI tank, for example, and move it
up onto the side of this hill, like this,
OK and then play the game. Let's look at it! Well there's no gravity, so we need to put
gravity back on, Compile the blueprint, and play again.
Watch what happens! It lands on the slope, it slides down, but it's got a lot of friction
on that tank OK, and that is what's causing our
issues is the amount of friction. Now we do want some friction, in fact, the amount I slide sideways, you could
argue there's not even enough friction, but is a subject of another lecture to talk
about how we cope with, deal with, and generally
organize friction. So well done, your tank at least is ready to move. You can
see that it's got the force, now we'll find out how to overcome that friction!